---
layout: page
title: About me
---

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://i.ibb.co/hgSQhJ3/image-5ycn-Q91-D-1682375230573-raw.jpg" alt="Alt text" width="50%">
</p>


## About me

Hello! 

It would certainly be misleading to begin this with the universal form: I am an
$x$ currently employed at $y$, etc. For the very purpose of this blog is to
serve as a unifying point for the most various of my interests, from literature
to mathematics. Since some —though certainly not most— of the entries will
relate to my field, I am however forced to comply with the canonical standards.

I am a data scientist —whatever that means—, currently working at a neuroscience
laboratory in UPenn. I entered the field after a few years of studying computer
science, and curiously via readings concerning formal epistemology —a fact from
which you may deduce my interest for philosophy. 

A brief description of my intellectual development might go as follows.
Originally, I wanted to major in philosophy, to the study of which I devoted
most of my teenage years. At eighteen, I discovered the work of Bertrand
Russell, which on its turn pointed me to Frege. From this came a profound
interest in logics and mathematics, which combined with my commitment to the
philosophy of mind evolved into a passion for computer science. During the
course of this process, there was not a single period in which I did not enjoy
and (try to) produce literature —particularly poetry.

With so varying interests, I found it very difficult as a young student to
choose a career path. I did not know whether I wanted to be a poet, a
philosopher, a mathematician, or a scientist. The process by virtue of which
science got the upper hand is hardly transparent even to myself —however badly
that may sound. But I love scientific work —and I still love all those things I
once considered devoting my life to. So in short, this blog is an attempt at
building a shrine to all those which I hold to be the dearest things of life.

</div>



