---
title: Cartas a Paulina
categories: [ Personal ]
---

§ As I watch the dying sun I know: so much of me was lost with your death. I try
not to think about it much, but it is not seldom that an unexpected sign—a
flower, a park bench, a sunset as of now—instantiates before my mind the days I
loved you. You were the earliest love. We met when we were thirteen and at
thirteen we were sweethearts. We went on and off, from lovers to friends,
without losing a bit of our affection for each other. When we were friends, we
were best friends. And so it was for years.

By the end of highschool you fell to drug addiction and eating disorders. At
first, I was not aware of this, for as all began you started to push me away.
You would visit me sporadically, in times of health; I would ascribe your time
of absence to mere distraction and, without noticing how troubled were the
waters of your heart—you kept this from me shrewdly—I would accept from you
whatever love you came to give.

By the time we went to college I became aware of your disorders. You stranded
away from me and I stranded away from you, for I went to live far from our town
of birth. And you were cutting me off in every way. Your addiction hurt me,
because not only it pained me to see you crippled by it, but it seized you to
the point that you chose, on every turn, drugs over those who loved you. Drugs
over me. It was impossible for me to get close to you again, no matter how hard
I tried. And in my ignorance I clang to this selfish way of heart, to this so
shallow pettiness that I now wish I'd had never felt.

About two years ago I managed to speak to you again. We had a long conversation.
I told you I still loved you, you said you loved me still. But our lives had
taken so opposite roads that we knew our love was not to be—we knew we loved the
remnants of past selves and not the strangers we were faced with. And so—I must
confess—I let my love for you die.

Some time after that, I fell in love with our mutual friend. The one you loved
so dearly! You got to see how much I love her: I love her like I did not know I
could love. We got engaged four months ago, and though you congratulated us, and
seemed genuinely happy for us, you did not go to our engagement party. You went
out drinking instead.

Three months ago you took your own life. Do not believe I am confused: I know we
were not the reason. I know how crippled by depression your last years were; I
hardly imagine how unbearably painful your existence was to you this whole last
year. It was not your first attempt; it was, however, the one that met success.
Neither I nor my fiancée—your life-long friend—went to your grave. I hope you
can forgive this. These last years you were a sort of mystery to us, a mystery
with a certain end. I wish you would have let me love you when I still could; I
wish you had not put up so many walls before me during our highschool years. It
brings me peace to know, without a doubt, that you were not only aware, but
certain, of my love. I am left wondering what to make of you now that you went
away.

§ Quisiera volverte a ver. El silbo del aire sobre el río, ¿no conjura tu
nombre? Imaginé que una vez más sentías la arena húmeda en tus pies—que una vez
más oías la lluvia—como si hubieras vuelto a nacer. Recordé tu rostro sobre el
mío: el cielo castigaba tu pelo. Y, de pronto, te deshice en el recuerdo. El
niño aquél estaba solo—tu cabellera fue solo una ilusión siniestra—un ctónico
espejismo—la lluvia era muda y la arena solitaria. Sentí que nunca te he visto,
o mejor, que en cien o doscientos años será como si no te hubiera visto—como si
nadie te hubiera visto. Y como si jamás te hubiera amado.

¿Y adónde fue la imagen de tu huella? De mi mano adolescente fueron todos esos
versos hacia vos. Pero ¿qué huella? Un objecto que cae arroja un indeterminable
pero exacto cuerpo de polvo en el aire—un haz de luz desgarra una penosa
cerradura, como aguardando la llave que ha de quitarle la vida—un mijo de
escarcha dibuja su última sombra en el instante anterior a derretirse—y son
todas estas cosas más perdurables que vos, que en la febril infancia de una vida
lamentable renunciaste a toda abnegación y a toda pausa—que has temido que el
tiempo pudiera detenerse y a los espejos crueles y al amor, y has evadido el
sueño y la pureza, la culpa y el ocaso, y la agridulce esencia de la vida. La
más sensual memoria de tu cuerpo es anegada en barro cenagoso, y la más tibia
imagen de tus ojos quiere transformarse en dos cuencas sin luz—en dos curiosos
universos de gusanos.

Ahora recuerdo: una mujer y un hombre están a mi lado—grito la gran noticia:
estás afuera—luego una elipsis. ¿Un año? ¿Dos? Selene ya está conmigo. Tu rostro
aparece frente a nosotros. Elipsis, otra vez. En la mano de Selene hay una
alianza. Silencio. Luego tu muerte. Entre las dos elipsis te vi dos o tres
veces. Entre la última y tu muerte, ninguna. No sé dónde estás enterrada. Finjo
que el cementerio es algo así como una leyenda urbana—una superstición—algo que
tiene que ver con los muertos porque la gente lo imagina, pero que no existe. A
veces me pregunto: ¿Y si visitara la tierra de tu entierro? ¿Entonces qué? ¿Un
llanto miserable, el arrancar la hierba con las manos? ¿O la anhedonia azul de
todos estos días?

Debo estar más muerto yo, que hablo vivo con los muertos, que vos que sos
nombrada por los vivos.

§ Como arena que se escurre entre los dedos de los pies, memoria por memoria vas
desapareciendo. Pero yo he prometido recordarte. ¿Cuál es el núcleo duro del
recuerdo, la última piedra inalienable, que no han de llevar las aguas de
ninguno de los mares? Y si bien inamovible, ¿no la erosionarán los impiadosos
embates? Quiero decir: Aun si jamás te olvido, ¿a quién estaré recordando?

§ What warmth lived in your arms...! I'm sorry. I wish that you forgive me. I
was a fool. Crying you said to me: *I wish to see you*. I did not want to
listen. Among the many records of your voice there is that cry. I should have
went to you. I did not know that you would die. Forgive this sorry soul—I swear
that all of it was true—everything I said was true. How terrible is death! We,
the living, are lost—but now you have attained the wisest form of peace. Your
love... it guides me still! 

§ I've lost it. No! It was taken from me! The last record of you is gone. Now
only this failing neurons—so prone to error—so short-living and weak. My
sweetest friend, how much I wish to show you that these stars blind us still,
that rivers stubbornly flow, that I live on and well! Now that I've lost your
voice I come to speak: I did not want to speak—I wanted to know of the silence
you've become—but now I come to speak and tell that all insists to be and life
persists and I live on!

§ Esta mañana leía *The private memoirs and confessions of a justified sinner*.
La oscuridad no fue tuya desde siempre, pero alguna vez también has encontrado,
en algún lugar de tu camino, un diablo metamorfo. La tracción que ejerce sobre
el protagonista el numen misterioso me hizo pensar en tu adicción. Pero nunca he
de saber lo que sentiste.
