---
title: On individuality
categories: [ Personal ]
---

If an individual desires to live as an individual, the most important question he ought to ask is: *Is this mine?* The matter of his question, as we imagine it, is not a physical object, but any idea at all. Although it is false that we are so plastic that our habits may be explained entirely by social and cultural conditions, it is a fact that any *I* is a more or less organized collection of habits, and that the latter can only be understood as habits *in a given environment*. We cannot elude our culture—however, if one is to become individuated, it is crucial to separate the weed from the chaff. This is specially true if one takes into consideration that ideas are capable of inducing feelings, and that some feelings ought to be avoided. How many suffer from jealousy or possessiveness without ever having asked the question of whether monogamy is desirable or not? How many of our customs have emerged from the unlimited well of our own selves, where creative activity blossoms and meaning flourishes, and how many have been passively accepted? Everybody knows these are questions that must be asked—yet very few people do. 

Needless to say, in speaking of the creative force which lies in the individual, and our desire to see individuality develop, in no way is implied that the individual is independent from its environment. The very premise of these ideas is that he isn't. Furthermore, I do not sustain that the meaning of individuality is to detach oneself from society. I simply maintain that a meaningful life is that in which our habits are *ours*, be it because we have come to them originally, as one that carves his way through thicketed weeds and thorns, or because we have adopted them from others via deliberated choice. This is best said in negative terms: A life where habits are simply inherited or received, as one passively receives a place of birth or certain parents, is not worth living.

As I see it, the very essence of apathy lies in having lost the zeal required to produce these questions. Once this inquisitive attitude is lost—once habits, and with them the institutions which are their social expression, are taken to be not the products of a certain age or the commands of a certain order, but as much a fact of nature as that there are sun and moon—then any sense of potency vanishes and the ingredients of sympathy are disolved. Today, every working man in Argentina is convinced that he alone is the master of his faith—That only zeal and entrepreneurship may elevate their social condition. Intertwined with such ideas is the notion that the state ought to disappear, that lagging social conditions are a consequence of laziness or incompetence, and that mega-corporations are benefactors. Wage labor, which only a century ago was commonly taken as a form of slavery, is today not only regarded a natural order, but one of its principal virtues is said to be its coincidence with human nature. It is pointless to say that the Argentinian laborer will remain impoverished and declassed. Countless material conditions ensure that this ought to be. However, the stability of these conditions, if not their very existence, greatly depend on one immaterial fact: The belief that the current order is the natural order—And moreover, the idea that should anyone intervene with it, he would be intervening with *nature*—A sinful deed unless one is God. These ideas and beliefs have been cemented in the footman's mind. And when the consensus is that current order is natural order there is no place for progress. In essence, this is the combined antithesis of democracy and education: Consensus, on one hand, where dissent is the heart of democratic order; confusion of contingency with necessity, which is the clearer sign of lack of a critical education. 
