---
title: The purpose of (computer) science 
subtitle: A few ethical observations
---


Technological development is occurring at a rate that greatly surpasses
our capacity to collectively conceive, consider, and decide upon its ethical
implications. Ethical decisions fall in the hands of the individuals that own
the means of such development. These individuals are not necessarily qualified
for those decisions, but even if they were, every technological advancement
affecting the general population, decisions on this matter should still be
democratic. For each success achieved via —let us say— deep neural networks,
there is a loss: the inference of the molecular structure of every protein known
to man came with the use of facial recognition by the State —with the funding
of hope-bearing research comes the wasteful allocation of talented minds and
money to sterile and futile endeavors —and even with the most fascinating
technologies, such as the inference of perceived sensory information through EEG
scans, for each favorable usage one easily fancies a hundred perilous ones.

Insofar as this is true, no scientist concerning himself with the development
of artificial intelligence can be a blind market actor. I do not see it as a
requirement that his work should be *ethically noble*, since we require that
from no other professions —the shoemaker and the farmer are not producers of
*ethical good*. It suffices to require that we are being productive to society;
this is, that our work enriches society as a whole, be it in small or large
degree, just as we are all enriched by society. Our knowledge should strive for
begetting or improving only those technologies that are not designed for
oppression, that are not to be enjoyed only by a privileged few, and that may
lighten the burden of existence for the whole of human kind —in whatever tiny
way.

The extent to which computer science, and particularly artificial intelligence,
can be used for this purpose —the improvement of human life— needs not be put
out in detail. I have found scientific work, being a small and humble component
of the great machinery of science, which sets out to understand and to
ameliorate human suffering, and to cast the spell of ignorance away, is more
than I could ask for. But this needs not be the case for everybody. Nothing of
what was said here is a lecture on *what to do*; rather, it is a discourse on
*what to care about*. Humane and honest ponderation upon the latter point
should suffice to disclose a path for anyone.

The cynic's reply to all of this, I disregard. As long as there are objectively
good and bad things —a tenet I here axiomatically accept, not being this the
place to make its case— as long as there are things truly deserving of the
epithets *good* and *bad*, I say, it will immediately follow a necessary
concern for proliferating the ones worthy of the first, and diminishing those
that bear the latter. The widespread idea that such an elementary concern
should disappear in what comes to our role in society, in the name of a
so-called natural tendency to maximize individual profit at all costs, is not
even worth the attention of anyone sane enough to conceive the perils (and
utter wastefulness) of blind technological advancement as it occurs today.

The meaning of any idea —the pragmatist claims— is the whole of its effects. I
venture: the meaning of any discipline too. Whatever meaning computer science
is to have lays in our hands.



