---
title: A supernatural experience
categories: [ Personal ]
---

The experience I should wish to register now occurred many moons ago, when I was
fifteen years old. It is, in fact, an enthralling set of coincidences, so
unlikely indeed that I thought it should be the expounder of some secret
meaning. And although a meaning it didn't have, so I believe, still the series
of events was not inconsequential, for it gave way to two practices still
ritualistically carried out by me almost daily: the keeping of a personal diary
as well as of a dream log. 

The phenomenon, so I term it now, happened in the least genial of days. It was
cold and the sky was in its entirety hidden under a cloak of clouds. From the
moment my eyes were in that day opened, I felt as if a sort of spiritual malady
had taken over me, spending every hour in such deep state of despondency, and
seized by such dejection, that I barely reckoned myself—for I naturally tend to
be enthusiastic and gay. Perhaps three or four hours after noon, I spontaneously
decided to take a walk around the neighborhood, but by virtue of which
motivation I do not know, since I was not in the habit of taking walks in such
unprompted manner. I walked for about fifteen minutes, and I can swear that
during the whole duration of my walk, I could hear an ambulance siren going. Of
course this is not odd in itself, but the fact that the volume did not recede,
as if not only the ambulance were still, but I were still as well, and my steps
took me not closer nor farther from its wail, seemed to me strange and
suggestive. I was *already* in a suggestive mood, and indeed I sensed an ominous
tone in everything I came to find, and particularly in this wail I could not
distant myself from, and which I felt was prelusive of some catastrophic event. 

In this curious state of mind, by chance I came across a friend of mine, whom I
will call *N*. I told him of my restless mood, and he suggested that we sat in a
nearby park and relaxed for a while, which is what we did. But upon sitting in
the cold grass, and turning my face to the sky, I saw an impressively large
cloud that flew considerably below the rest, and which—at least I
thought—undoubtedly bore the shape of an executioner's hood, even with the very
holes intended to give way to mouth and eyes. In this I could not have been very
wrong, for my friend agreed with me with excitement—but as he saw in this
curiosity nothing more than that, a curiosity, the brewing dismality which had
taken hold of me already grew furiously, like a solution effervescing at the
contact with a most malicious agent—and more and more it was suggested to my
suggestive conscience that some kind of danger lurked close to me and surrounded
me. I became so agitated, and in so great need of rest, that I retired from
*N*'s company and returned to my home, which I had left not more than forty
minutes ago. I expected to find the place as I left it; namely, with my mother
and sister chatting in the patio, my brother somewhere upstairs, the lights on
and the windows open. But as I entered, a much different scenario was
configuring before me. Every light was off, which resulted, because the day was
so gray and cloudy, in almost absolute obscurity—Every window was shut and the
most absolute silence reigned. I felt as if I had entered into a world of
silence; as if, as were the fire or the air for Presochratic philosophers, the
material principle of that world was silence. I asked if anybody was home, and
after a few seconds I sensed light footsteps descending from the second floor.
It was María, who was my nanny when I was a boy, and who still lives in the
familiar home practically as another member of my family, and whose son grew
with me as my own brother. She was the only one home, and seemed quite agitated
as well. Without letting me speak, nay, before I gave three steps into the hall,
she told me of a dream she just had, and asked me about its meaning—something
she usually does, as she is a quite superstitious person, and holds the view
that dreams have a precise symbolic meaning. She said she saw a jet plane flying
in the sky, that the plane wrote an *M* in the sky, and then proceeded to fall
from the sky. Her ex-husband's name was *M.....*, and asked if the dream bore
any meaning with respect to him. But I was agitated already, and felt uneasy and
sad, and only wanted to sleep, so I eluded her questions and went to bed without
discussing the matter much.

Nothing else happened that day. But the next morning, during the first hour of
school, the vice-director came to our classroom and asked a friend of mine,
*M.....*, named just like María's ex-husband, to please accompany him. I payed
little attention to this, until some minutes later there came again *M.....*,
and explained the reason he was called. His uncle had died in a plane crash. 

I will not describe the feeling aroused in my soul by these news. I will rather
provide a quick summary of the events so far. First, I woke up with an *ominous*
feeling, which was exacerbated by surely normal events, like the constant
wailing of an ambulance. Secondly, I saw in the sky the hood of an executioner,
which I took for a symbol of death, further increasing my uneasiness. Thirdly,
María practically threw her dream upon me, a dream where a plane drew an *M* in
the sky and subsequently fell—with the important comment that *M.....* was his
ex-husband's name. Lastly, like a staged and preconceived final act: The very
next morning, my friend, also named *M.....*, loses a loved one, and of all ways
perhaps in one of the most unlikely ones of all: a plane crash!

I have not forgotten the deepness nor the violence of the anguish which
sequestered me that morning, and which fettered me for days, nor the strange and
frightening suspicion that supernatural forces must have orchestrated the
events. In particular, I remember the fear of anything remotely similar
happening again, for I thought I had been given signals of a terrible faith, and
had failed to interpret them, and lamented the very idea of facing such
responsibility again. I distinctly recall as well that it was around this time
that I first knew of Carl Jung. My father had noticed my pensive and despondent
state, and asked me about it, and after hearing the whole story, instead of
discarding it as nonsense, recommended that I should examine some concepts of
psychoanalysis—particularly that of *projection*. His intention, I gather, was
to remove from my soul the thought, which I had confessed to him, that I was
going crazy, as well as to provide some insight into the events that depended
not on supernatural explanations. In fact, if experiences such as these were not
only common to many people, but studied and (at least in attempt) explained,
then I would stop feeling so strange and begin to examine the events from a
calmer and more reasonable position. In any case, the matter was dropped after a
short period of time, during which I devoted more serious efforts than before to
the inquiry of my inner world. The reader may suspect this was the principle of
*vanity*, instead of introspection, for I too often reproach to myself the
vulgarity of this habit of paying so much attention to oneself. This tendency
did not begin with the experience I have hereby recorded, but it certainly
became more serious, as I became aware of how easily an individual could be
tricked by his own ideas, or fooled by his own dreams, if inattentive. Perhaps
this very site, with all its personal notes, whose degree of self-disclosure
sometimes feels obscene to me, and constitute a total violation of my natural
tendency for reservation, would not have existed if it weren't for the
coincidences I've made public.
