---
title: On archetypes
categories: [ Science, Philosophy, Personal ]
---

# Foreword

I wish to put in writing some observations on an intellectual matter I deem of
special interest. One could reduce it to the study of brains. In this sense, the
matter is circumscribed to what may be oxymoronically termed ''instinctual
representations''. Such ''representations''—I use the term loosely for now—are
plausibly the byproduct of the emergence of symbolic faculties in instinctive
beings. This may not be too precise, but it is also not blatantly wrong, and so
I accept it as a decent preliminary formulation. I am speaking of what a
peculiar branch of psychoanalysis termed *archetypes*.

The concept of *archetype* does not originate in neurobiology, and I do wish to
attend to its pre-scientific formulations. Firstly, because in the genealogy of
any scientific idea there are large branches of (in general quite illuminating)
pre-scientific antecedents. Secondly, because the hypotheses that concern us go
far beyond the scope of scientific inquiry and raise questions about human
nature itself.

The goal of this writing is to determine whether the term *archetype*, as used
in different philosophical and psychological traditions, is meaningful or not.
Once we settle what we *mean* by archetype we may decide whether archetypes, so
understood, exist. It is probably the case that mind-problems are of the kind
where propositions are to be measured only in by the weight of existing
evidence, and not by conclusive proof. A love for sharp edges and rigor compels
me to limit the scope of these speculations to what I deem to be in line with
neurobiological evidence and our current scientific understanding of the brain.
It is utterly short-sighted to claim that reason can only delve into matters
where certain knowledge exists (or could exist). The advancement of science
itself must always begin with educated conjectures, and a philosophical attitude
towards uncertain matters can *at least*, when executed correctly, reveal the
right and the wrong questions to be raised.

# Archetypes

The term archetype dates back at least to Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, who
suggested an echo (*apekhémata*) of the divine essence exists on every sensible
object, by virtue of which they may elevate to the immaterial *arkhitypía*.
Here, the word expresses the perfect platonic ideal of which each sensible
object is an imperfect realization. This is not the sense of the term that
interests us—although the notion of *echo* (or *imprint, trace*, etc.) will be
relevant. In fact, our issue is partly the different meanings the term ascribes
to across traditions and contexts. Even the work of Jung, that elevated the term
to an unprecedented intellectual dimension, lacks an unequivocal definition,
sometimes confronting us with the suspicion that the very author bestows it with
different meanings depending on the period of his intellectual life or the
object of his exposition.

It is my opinion that this linguistic issue is not as daunting as it may appear
at first. A simple reason for this is that many of the meanings commonly
attributed to the term can be readily disregarded as nonsensical. Secondly, some
advances in the field of neuroscience—particularly in the line of research set
forth by Panksepp—have contributed a great amount of empirical material to the
question. This rich set of facts lays out more plausible—and potentially
falsifiable—notions of what may be meant by "archetype". In other words, though
the riddle is far from answered, we have at our disposal a whole domain of
reality that the ancient philosophers—or early psychoanalysts—lacked. Thus, the
contending formulations, to our surprise, are in the end not very numerous.

# Jung

Jung had an explicitly dualistic outlook on the psyche. He endorsed the
philosophical stance according to which there is no evidence in favor of the
hypothesis that links psychological phenomena to physical and chemical
processes, that there is no reason to regard the mind as an epiphenomenon of
matter, and that it should be treated as a *sui generis* factor—at least until
the artificial creation of a mind can be established as an achievable endeavor.
This is explicitly held in the work *Archetypes of the collective unconscious*,
written around 1932. The state of evidence at the time may perhaps make this
claim understandable. However, at least to my knowledge, he never explicitly
relinquished it.

Jung frequently associated the notion of archetype to that of primordial image.
This association is particularly present whenever he was interested in drawing
the parallelism between mythological motifs and the archetypal phenomena he
allegedly witnessed in his clinical work. He also ties the concept of archetype
to the notion of pattern of functioning:

> Like every animal, he \[the man\] possesses a preformed psyche which breeds
> true to his species and which (\...) reveals distinct features traceable to
> family antecedents. (\...) We are unable to form any idea of what those
> dispositions or aptitudes are which make instinctive actions in animals
> possible. And it is just as impossible for us to know the nature of the
> preconscious psychic disposition that enables a child to react in a human
> manner. We can only suppose that his behavior results from patterns of
> functioning, which I have described as images. The term "image" is intended to
> express not only the form of the activity taking place, but the typical
> situation in which the activity is released" — 1959, pag. 78.

This evolutionary speculation is not trivial. However, it is a rather strange
twist of the logical chain to propose an evolutionary basis for an immaterial
phenomenon. The process of natural selection affects the course of biological
species made up of material elements, all the way down to a rather peculiar
acid, whose material nature—I should hope—is uncontested. Putting that aside, to
claim we do not know the mechanisms that make instinctive actions possible is
false under the present state of science. The neuroscientific findings seem to
support, to a certain extent, the Jungian hypothesis of "archetypal" behavioral
patterns. We will come to discuss these findings later on.

To Jung, archetypes are a twofold concept. The *archetype-as-such* is postulated
as an abstract but yet unrealized pattern, a contentless and strictly formal
pattern. The *archetype* as a manifestation is a real image or pattern which
somehow corresponds to the form determined by the *archetype-as-such*. This is
simply lingo for a simple ethological facts: animals have the capacity to
distinguish patterns, and there is a difference between the "mental"
organization which configures the pattern and the appearance of such pattern in
nature. Furthermore, Jung emphasized above all $a.$ the affective tone of these
"primordial images" as well as $b.$ that they should be understood not by virtue
of an essential content but by their teleology—*id est*, the specific behavioral
disposition induced by them.

> But we only arrive at the meaning of a physical organ when we begin to ask
> teleological questions. Hence the query arises: What is the biological purpose
> of the archetype? —1959, pag. 161.

It continues to be unclear in what way the biological conception of the
archetype and the immaterial notion of the psyche may theoretically harmonize.
But we shall leave this question aside for the moment to discuss a bit more
deeply about these primordial images, or patterns of behavior.

With regards to their teleology, one mustn't be *in principle* convinced that it
exists. A fair number of biological traits are nothing but the byproduct of
others. However, there is good reason to conclude that the evolutionary
development *archetypes*, so understood, is directly propitious to survival.
Indeed, the general idea is the phenomenology of archetypes—the specific
behavioral dispositions that are understood to be archetypal—consist of the
induction of an affective state by stimuli to which we were selected to respond
emotionally. Incidentally, such affective state could be induced by stimuli only
*resembling* that to which we were selected to respond, thus evoking an
unwarranted response.  In other words, certain stimuli may be imbued with, so to
speak, archaic affect, and this seems to be essential to whatever may be meant
by *archetype*. It has been speculated that this could account for certain
universal religious motifs. For example, in *The Masks of God: Primitive
Mythology*, Joseph Campbell writes:

> Chicks with their eggshells still adhering to their tails dart for cover when
> a hawk flies overhead, but not when the bird is a gull or duck, heron or
> pigeon. Furthermore, if the wooden model of a hawk is drawn over their coop on
> a wire, they react as though it were alive—unless it be drawn backward, when
> there is no response.
>
> Here we have an extremely precise image—never seen before, yet recognized with
> reference not merely to its form but to its from in motion, and linked,
> furthermore, to an immediate, unplanned, unlearned, and even unintended system
> of appropriate action: flight, to cover. (...) Furthermore, even if all the
> hawks in the world were to vanish, their image would still sleep in the soul
> of the chick—never to be roused, however, unless by some accidente of art
> ($\ldots$). With that the obsolete reaction of the flight to cover would
> recur; and, unless we knew about the earlier danger of hawks to chicks, we
> should find the sudden eruption difficult to explain. 'Whence', we may ask,
> 'this abrupt seizure by an image to which there is no counterpart in the
> chicken's world? ($\ldots$)'.

It is not difficult to observe what Campbell suggests in this passage: It could
be that there were now non-present stimuli imbued with affect by virtue of our
evolutionary endowment, and certain ''accidents of art'' could thus induce
apparently unwarranted affective states. Both Jung and Campbell used this
hypothesis to explain the alleged universality symbols that seem to hold a
certain aprioristic affective charge, thus appearing universally in dreams and
myths. The scope of this alleged universality is not altogether clear. Some have
proposed general practices but not particular images to fall within it. Others
have drawn their attention to particular imaginations: for example, that of the
universal flood. I do not wish to discuss this point, for I cannot see a way to
circumscribe the speculation within a limiting frame. And where there is place
for unbounded speculation there is no place for truth. So, having presented a
general overview of the more or less pre-scientific conception of *archetypes*,
I should wish to proceed with the attempts of neuroscience at tackling this
question.

# Archaic affect

Allow me to advance that I shall not give too much detail on the neurobiology of
the findings hereby commented. Doing so would make this writing much longer and
technical than I intend. I should rather wish to summarize what I understand to
be the principal conclusions and postulates of affective neuroscience and their
relationship to the concept of *archetype*. Before discussing these
contributions, however, it is pertinent to say a few words concerning both their
ontology and their epistemology. This is important because discussions
concerning the mind are famously problematic, and it would be imprudent to
simply delve into the neuroscience before addressing a few concerns.

With regards to ontology, it is a common mistake to believe that Descartes
committed an intellectual sin when postulating his *res cogitans*. In fact, when
doing so, he acted in accord with standard scientific practice. It is obvious
that certain human faculties cannot be explained by mechanical laws. If matter
was to be entirely described by the laws of mechanics, as was the stance at
Descarte's time, then some other substance had to be postulated in order to
explain these non-mechanistic faculties. When Newton and Galileo postulated
*forces*, they were doing so in similar conditions. Rather than a positive
scientific achievement, such postulate was a problematic, but inescapable
necessity.

The standard philosophical stance today is a commitment to a materialist monism.
I share this stance—but the conundrum which forced Descartes to reject monism
remains. It seems that, rather than postulating a new substance, the appropriate
position is a form of Spinozian *dual-aspect monism*, as Panksepp described it.
It is a fact that thought emerges from matter—it is happening now as I write—but
it is plausible that properties emergent from matter are better understood in
non-material terms. This is in no sense an ontological claim; I simply state
that a complex system may be not be properly described by the same laws which
describe its constitutive elements. So, it seems the missing piece which
Descartes' *res cogitans* aimed to account for were, in fact, complex neural
dynamics. *How* complex neural dynamics may produce thought, emotion, etc.,
pertains to scientific inquiry rather than to philosophical speculation.
Affective neuroscience, in particular the work of Panksepp and Damasio, has
provided an immense corpus of evidence in favor of the notion that conciousness
is not only an emergence of complex neural organization, but particularly of
those deep regions of the brain whose function seems to be the realization of
emotion and affect. 

With regards to epistemology, the principal question is: How can we study
emotions scientifically? The answer to this question is given by three
observations which are, to me, scientifically impeccable. *(1)* Animals exhibit
outward indicators of emotional states. The clearest example are the separation
distress calls. *(2)* We can inquire on the neurobiology regulating such
expressions using standard scientific methods. *(3)* If artificial exposition to
the neurobiological regulators of such emotions produces corresponding
*feelings* in humans, the weight of the evidence favors the conclusion that
animals also experience these feelings—at least when the brain systems involved
are homologous. For example, in a paper entitled *Opioid blockade and social
comfort in chicks* (1980), Panksepp showed that opioid blockade with naloxone
reduced the imprinting effect in chicks. More generally, his findings at the
time suggested that opioids mediate social interaction and bonding. More recent
papers of his added a great deal of evidence to this claim. We know certain
opioids, such as oxytocin, mediate human bonding and partially regulate the
feelings of warmness and care present, for instance, between a newborn and a
mother. Since the neurobiological circuitry involved is homologous in both
species, it is not unreasonable to claim that similar feelings permeate the bond
between a little chick and its mother.

As a last note, and to put this preamble aside, I should say that I follow
Panksepp's terminology. By *emotion*, I mean any affective, cognitive,
behavioral or physiological change in the organism. In this sense, the word is
more tightly linked to its etymology than to its conversational meaning. By
*affect*, I mean quite broadly any subjective and experiential feelings, whereas
an *emotional affect* denotes the experiential component of an internal brain
state.

Emotional affects are generally associated to external events. When compared to
external inductors of affect, internal ones (e.g. the memory of a deceased loved
one) are rather few, and perhaps limited to our own species. Even so, every
affect is an internal function of the brain. Scientists have used the terms
*valence, arousal* and *surgency* to describe different aspects of the affective
experience, without ever daring to speak of emotions. The present state of
science, so I believe, conclusively leads to the fact that such terms would make
no sense if not denoting affect.

The essential thesis of affective neuroscience as a field, as far as I
understand it, is the following: that affective experience ''reflects a
primitive form of consciousness which was the evolutionary platform for the
emergence of more complex forms of consciousness'' (Panksepp, *Affective
consciousness: Core emotional feelings in animals and humans*, 2005). Here,
*consciousness* refers to ''brain states that have an experiential feel to them,
and it is envisioned as a multi-tiered process that needs to be viewed in
evolutionary terms, with multiple layers of emergence.'' (*idem*).

The evidence in favour of this thesis is close to overwhelming and, to my eyes,
at least in essence, little doubt remains about its truth. There are, of course,
disputes concerning technicalities—the manner in which different aspects of
consciousness evolved, the neurobiology modulating certain features of
consciousness—but the essential claim remains untouched. Not only is the
experiential component of emotion common to, at least, all mammals, but it
represents a primitive form of consciousness that is still present in the human
brain. This presence is attested by the fact that the systems from which such
form of consciousness emerges remain very well preserved and highly homologous
across mammalian species. It is this evolutionary insight what draws a link
between the conclusions of affective neuroscience and pre-scientific
speculations on psychological archetypes.

Panksepp used the term *equalia* (*e* from evolutionary, *qualia* from its
traditional philosophical sense) to denote the varieties of positive or negative
feelings not simply mediated by our perceptual interfaces, but by the
orchestration of inherited emotional systems in the brain. The raw affects
engendered by such subcortical systems are ''ancestral memories (instincts) that
promote survival'' (the reader is surely reminded of Campbell's example of the
chick and the eagle).

It is not hard to see that these ''ancestral memories'' are what Jung termed
*primordial images*. Needless to say, a highly complex, and in many senses still
impenetrable interplay exists between the archaic emotional systems of the
mammalian brain and the cortical regions to which our own species owns its
so-called superior faculties. Notwithstanding, these cortical regions are
entirely inessential to primary forms of consciousness; such forms subsist even
in extreme cases of virtually non-existing cortical development. This was proven
not only in Panksepp's work, but quite famously by Damasio as well.

Indeed, it seems that consciousness is like a curl or (in Spanish) *rizo*; the
superior aspects of it can be removed while preserving pre-conscious affect, but
whenever its primitive components are lost, nothing of it subsists. The
different ''levels'' of consciousness have been described in the neuroscientific
literature as *primary, secondary* and *tertiary* consciousness; or as *core
consciousness* and *extended consciousness*. Regardless of the terminology,
lower levels of consciousness have been demonstrated to depend on the primitive,
value-encoding neurocircuitry described before. In short, consciousness can
exist without cognition—but it cannot be without affect.

The relationship between the neurocircuitry of affective experience and
cognitively complex phenomena, such as spirituality or dreams, has not been
explored so far. However, in so far as affect is, virtually by definition,
value-encoding, it seems necessary that spiritual experience is some kind of
cognitive sublimation of these archaic components of human experience. This
would at least account for $a.$ the striking structural similarities across the
wide range of so-called archetypal stories and beliefs—the hero story, animism,
shamanism, etc.—*b.* the profound affect with which such stories and beliefs are
imbued; and $c$. the absolute resilience of such narratives in a scientific
society. The same can be said of dreams.

There is one peculiarly interesting paper, [The affective Core of the
Self](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01424/full), which
surveys the insight provided by affective neuroscience into one of the specific
archetypes proposed by Jung. I will let the reader judge the conclusions of this
paper on his own; they do not differ from what I have described thus far but in
scope and technical precision.

# Discussion

The question remains: What do we mean, after all this, by *archetype*? Is the
psychoanalytic definition in line with the neuroscience of affect? If not,
should the concept be disregarded or reformulated? Recall Campbell's chick
example:

> Chicks with their eggshells still adhering to their tails dart for cover when
> a hawk flies overhead, but not when the bird is a gull or duck, heron or
> pigeon. Furthermore, if the wooden model of a hawk is drawn over their coop on
> a wire, they react as though it were alive—unless it be drawn backward, when
> there is no response.
>
> Here we have an extremely precise image—never seen before, yet recognized with
> reference not merely to its form but to its from in motion, and linked,
> furthermore, to an immediate, unplanned, unlearned, and even unintended system
> of appropriate action: flight, to cover. (...) Furthermore, even if all the
> hawks in the world were to vanish, their image would still sleep in the soul
> of the chick—never to be roused, however, unless by some accidente of art
> ($\ldots$). With that the obsolete reaction of the flight to cover would
> recur; and, unless we knew about the earlier danger of hawks to chicks, we
> should find the sudden eruption difficult to explain. 'Whence', we may ask,
> 'this abrupt seizure by an image to which there is no counterpart in the
> chicken's world? ($\ldots$)'.

For all practical purposes, it seems correct to say an ''ancestral memory''
exists in the chick; one embedded in deep and ancient subcortical systems that
mediate affective experience. But before drawing any conclusions, two things
ought to be pointed out. Firstly, though affective neuroscience successfully
mapped the circuitry involved in producing emotions and concomitant feelings, it
advanced little or nothing on *how* such circuitry produces them. With regards
to its evolutionary perspective, one mustn't forget how little it is to claim
that affect and emotion are part of the biological endowment of the mammalian
brain. In this sense, affective neuroscience has provided evidence, as well as a
considerable amount of detail, with regards to a claim that on itself is not
altogether revolutionary. The only finding of affective neuroscience that truly
deviates from standard thought is that which links consciousness to emotional
affects rather than to superior cognitive faculties. The rest consists mainly of
mapping the neurobiological correlates of ethological facts known many decades
ago.

Secondly, recall that I initially formulated the object of this writing,
although tentatively, as ''instinctual representations''. This is, at least in
part, what Jung had in mind when he spoke of archetypes. It seems he was correct
to say that, in what he meant by archetype, both the activity taking place as
well as the stimuli which unleashes it are to be contained in the meaning of the
concept. In this sense, *archetype* would refer to the typical *unconditioned*
(this is, unlearned and inherited) affective response to a particular stimuli as
well as to such stimuli. Thus, some distinction must drawn between archetypal
response and archetypal image, and clarity must be achieved in discerning
whether what we mean by *archetype* exists in the stimuli (i.e. the perceptual
image) or the subject which perceives it. 

Furthermore, one must also decide whether to speak of ''representations'' or
''images'' is justified or not. In *Human knowledge*, Russell provides a sense
of what is meant by the phrase "$A$ is an image or idea of $B$". In the spirit
of the empiricist tradition, he states:

> ¿Qué supone decir que $A$ es una "imagen" o "idea" de $B$? Primero, debe haber
> semejanza; más particularmente, si ambos son complejos, debe haber semejanza
> de estructura. Segundo, $B$ debe desempeñar cierto papel definido en la
> causación de $A$. Tercero, $A$ y $B$ deben tener ciertos efectos comunes, por
> ejemplo, causar las mismas palabras en una persona que los experimente.

Whatever is to be meant by *archetype* satisfies some, but not all of these
conditions. The image of a hawk, never seen before, evokes similar effects in
all little chicks; however, the hawk itself plays no part in the causation of
its aprioristic existence ''in the soul of the chick''. This should pose no
issue to us as long as we do not adopt empiricism to a radical degree. In what
comes to *similarity*, it is very unlikely that such term is even applicable to
the process in question. We have no reason to think a conscious ''mental image''
exists *a priori* in the chick's mind; and can one speak of ''similarities''
between a perceived object and an unconscious neurophysiological process?
Rather, it seems that we are in the face of a functional correspondence between
a perception and an emotional state; the chick's neurobiology has been selected
so as to respond in a defined manner to certain impressions, that of a hawk
among them. It follows that the use of the term *image* is rather figurative,
and does not accurately reflect neither the underlying neurological processes
nor the (pre)conscious experience involved in what must be meant by *archetype*.

Some clarity is gained in asking how is the chick's response different from a
mere reflex. The chick's response is certainly reflexive in the sense that it is
unlearned and, as Campbell points out, even unintentional. However, it has the
special property of involving affect. Is this what archetypes are then—a reflex
involving affect? This cannot be so, for then the sudden withdrawal of our hand
from a burning surface would be an ''archetypal response''. Affect is necessary,
but insufficient to account for the kind of experience which the concept strives
to specify. It is not hard to observe that most reflexes aim at avoiding an
incoming harm, but there is something evidently different from, say, the
blinking of our eyes before a rapid approaching object and the emotional
response evoked by the hawk. Both aim at avoiding danger, and are thus
propitious to survival, but while the first is a rapid motor operation, the
latter informs a lasting emotional state. When we trip and fall, our whole body
responds so as to alleviate the damage, but none of that implies a *brain state*
in the sense in which the anxiety and fear of perceiving a predator do. When we
burn and withdraw our hands there is affect, but not the induction of a lasting
emotional state, with its concomitant experiential component. The transition
from one emotional state to another is a *modal*, lasting, and global change; it
is here where the chick's response differs from mere reflex. Is it then that by
archetype we mean precisely those stimuli which induce, without conditioning,
lasting emotional brain states? If so, although not amounting to a total
novelty, the concept is certainly meaningful.

However, this definition is not entirely unproblematic. When a little kid burns
its hand, a strictly motor response is induced—the hand is rapidly withdrawn
from the burning object. But, almost surely, cry immediately ensues and lasts
for some amount of time. Here too we have the unconditioned induction of a
lasting emotional state. But I think no-one will argue that a burning pan, or
the situation here described, aren't parts of what the notion of *archetype*
strives to specify. What makes then the case of the chick and the hawk different
from this? The only answer to this question, as far as I can gather, is that the
stimuli in question is a perceived *image*; i.e. the perceptual channel by which
the stimuli induces the emotion is the visual system.

If such elucidation is correct, what Campbell's example gives as *archetype* is
nothing but this: A stimuli in the form of a visual pattern which induces,
without previous conditioning, an emotional brain state. The preponderance given
to visual patterns in some sense justifies the notion of primordial *image*,
although, as stated earlier, this shouldn't be understood to imply the ''image''
of the hawk lives aprioristically ''in the soul of the chick''. This is narrower
than what is meant by *equalia* in Panksepp. As far as I can see, among all
competing definitions, this is the only one which makes logical sense.

This is a partial success. We have determined what is meant by archetype; i.e. a
visual pattern which induces a lasting emotional state without conditioning nor
learning. The concept is meaningful, and in fact it is the only definition which
draws the symbolic and religious implications which Jung and Campbell, for
example, pointed out. Jung's *archetype-as-such* corresponds to the visual
pattern as encoded in the brain; it is not an actual image, but rather some sort
of neural encoding which, somehow, is sensitive to a visual pattern. An
*archetypal image* is any visual pattern which functionally corresponds to the
*archetype-as-such*; for example, a wooden or a real hawk in the chick's case.
However, how is this concept useful? And is the emphasis on visual patterns in
any sense justified? This doesn't seem to be the case. 

Firstly, we tend to think of the visual system as somehow more important than
other sensory systems. This is already evident in Aristotle's *De anima*, and
has never changed. In all rigor, however, I do not see why this is so. Take any
impression $I$ capable of inducing an emotional state without conditioning; how
is the property of being a visual impression of any peculiar relevance to the
essence of the process in question? Such property seems merely accidental. If
one takes the process abstractly, its singularity lies in the fact that an
organism is inherently capable of responding emotionally to certain external
perceptions. Whether such perceptions are the image of a hawk or the smell of a
hawk seems inessential to me. One could ask whether there are in fact non-visual
perceptions capable of inducing lasting emotional states *without learning*. In
other words, one could attempt to "rescue" the concept of archetype by claiming
that the restriction to visual perceptions, though not a logical necessity, is
imposed by nature. It is obvious that a lasting emotional state can be equally
induced by the image of a predator as well as by its smell; but I ignore whether
the smell can induce such response without previous learning. However, this
problem can be solved by observing that there are mammals deprived of vision
whose evolutionary endowment certainly encodes certain perceptions as
emotionally charged.


The neuroscientific study of archetypes, as we have defined them, has not been
to my knowledge undertaken. Such study would surely provide enormous insight
into the affective endowment of the animal brain. So many questions arise from
it that it is hard to contain our excitement. But I should not wish to delve on
the matter any further. Some degree of clarity and discernment has been
achieved; the goal of this entry is served.

I once more repeat the teachings of Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, who
suggested a celestial echo (*apekhémata*) exists in every sensible thing, by
virtue of which they may reach the immaterial *arkhitypía*. The *ancient
memories* (or *equalia*) revealed by neuroscience, quite curiously, have
something of both of these Greek concepts. They are *apekhémata* insofar as they
are an ancestral trace, an evolutionary imprint that, so to speak, echoes
through time by means of millennial evolution. They are *arkhitypía* in that
they consist in a primitive type encoded beyond the reach of our cognitive
faculties, deep in the subcortical emotional systems of our brains. Somewhere in
his complete works, though I cannot recall where, Jung wrote that we are, so to
speak, *thousands of years old*. This is, so I believe, sensibly true.

