---
title: On a fanatical book (by Titus Burckhardt)
categories: [ Literature, Personal ]
---

About four or five years ago, prying on my father's library, I came across a
book entitled *Fez: City of Islam*. The author, Titus Burckhardt. Because his
last name was that of the author of *The civilization of the Renaissance in
Italy*, a work of unspeakable value, and at the time an interest for Christian
and Muslim theology had fostered in me, it was impossible for me not to commit
the sin of theft—A sin, I should add, to which I condescended often before my
father's library, and which was not only never punished, nor solely tolerated,
but deliberately encouraged by the very victim!

My reading of *Fez: City of Islam* was one of the sweetest of my life. Its prose
I found delicious; its content was of the highest culture; I felt as if, by
virtue of a prodigy, I'd been induced to dream and walk the streets of the
ancient city myself. It is difficult to say whether the book is actually as good
as I recall—it is not the book itself, but the alchemy incurred upon opposing it
with our peculiar state of conscience, what makes it more or less memorable. I
content myself to say that *in memory* the book is exquisite. 

A few days ago, I acquired another work by the author. Entitled *Cosmology and
modern science*, the book attempts a critique of scientific knowledge as a
whole, of mathematical modeling in particular, and contains an extensive section
combating what was then modern psychology—namely, psychoanalysis—with particular
emphasis on the work of Carl Jung. What I found, however, was only
disappointment. Only the most general comments were somewhat satisfactory or
true; whenever a particular point was brought about, its justification was foul
and arbitrary, and its claim backwards and medieval.

The foulness of the book is circumscribed into the category of *dull
fanaticism*—or, as it is more commonly known, *theology*. As I mentioned briefly
in the first paragraph, I once felt some interest for theology. I then inquired
the works of some of the great theologians. The Christians Origen of Alexandria,
Saint Augustine, and Dionysious the Aeropagite, were delightful readings; so
were the Muslims Ibn Arabi, Avicena, and the exquisite Persian poet Al-Hallaj.
The majority of the rest was dull and barely tolerable, particularly Thomas
Aquinas, whose arguments never followed a straight forward path, but like a
serpent meandered in search of a conclusion that agreed with the Scriptures.

But even the delightful and exquisite readings were so only in a *literary*
sense, a sense within which I circunscribe the curious and exciting art of
exegesis. In terms of their *philosophy*, I was very rapidly disenchanted. In
truth, I found no philosophy at all: Every conclusion was beforehand an
assumption, and the most problematic questions were checked and answered by
finding some clever sophistry that proved the presupposed conclusion. I found
the most arbitrary manners of thought, the most peculiar attempts at proof, the
most extravagant arguments that human mind is capable of bearing. Metaphysics is
often like this, but theology has in general the added component of a dogma.

The work *Cosmology and modern science* is no exception to these sins. For
example, at a certain point, the following chain of thought is exposed. Firstly,
the notion of *form*, as understood by Greek philosophy, is defined. By form,
the author says, we understand the aggregation or association of the qualities
of a thing or a being—its immutable essence. The individual world is the formal
world, in this sense—The *form* is a principle of individuation in connection to
a matter or substance in which the form is to become manifest—But in itself, the
*form* is nothing but an archetype. (So far, Burckhardt only follows Dionysious
the Aeropagite.) After providing such definition, and objecting some critiques
of this notion of *form*, the author states:

>From what was just said follows that a species is itself an immutable "form";
>it could not evolve and transform into another species, although it may contain
>variations, which are diverse "projections" of a unique essential form of which
>they will never be separated—like the branches are never separated from the
>trunk.

The whole thesis of Darwin, he says, is based on a confusion (*sic*) between the
concepts of *species* and *variation*. For the sake of humor I add a sentence
that appears shortly after:

>One may certainly find some fishes that use their fines to crawl in the sand,
>but in vain one would expect to find the least beginning of a joint, which is
>the only thing that would make the forming of a leg or an arm possible.

Yes, indeed: This is a critique of Darwin based on the metaphysical concept of
*form*, as understood by an Athenian convert that lived in the first century! 

I don't think I have seen such bold attempt at arm-chair reasoning ever before.
None of it even approximates an interest for reality: First, a purely abstract
concept is assumed to capture the true nature of things; then the desired
conclusion is drawn from such assumption. It would be equally valid to assume
the Pythagorean notion that all numbers are rational to prove that $\pi$ is a
rational number. But this, if any, is the method of theology: Take an arbitrary
assumption, base it if possible either on ancient knowledge or primitive
speculation, and use it only to derive a ridicule conclusion. The enterprise is
to be judged depending on the degree in which your conclusion, however obscene
or stupid, agrees with whatever faith you happen to profess.

The book is filled with arguments of segments similar to the one above, which I
care not to reproduce. The reader may read the book himself if curious. I grant
that some observations in the book excited my curiosity and were, at least to
me, intelligent; but they were at the same time quite general comments either on
how the modern world conceives the world or the general differences between a
certain cosmology and another. As soon as something specific was to be
discussed, the reasoning became vicious and the book rendered itself vexing and
fanatic. 

After reading this book, and considering what I remember from *Fez: City of
Islam*, I see that Burckhardt was indeed a very brilliant man—sophisticated and
in possession of an outstanding education—but dogmatic and fanatic. I should add
that this flaws are not unique to religious people: Intelligence and education
are in general not sufficient to acquire even the most elementary scientific
intuition. I know a few atheist academics with truly mighty intellects, far
surpassing that of most men, not to mention my own, that still devote their
lives to showing that a certain idea is true, all when, because their
personalities inclined them to it, or by virtue of a personal obsession, they
have assumed it to be true from the very beginning. Vanity, fanaticism, the
esteem of originality over truth, all disturb even the greatest minds from
honest investigation. In this sense,  so I believe, the *conditio sine qua non*
for a person to become a scientist depends not on his intellect, but on his
personality.

In what comes to the author's critique of Jung, it's nothing but the indignation
of a fanatical mind. Some readers of Jung mistakenly see in his work a mystical
component. But in fact, Jung's hypothesis on a collective unconscious
categorically desacralizes religious experience. It passes from being a
supernatural phenomena to being the expression of archaic psychological
tendencies rooted in our evolutionary history. If treated the concept of the
collective unconscious somewhat mystically at times, to my eyes a mistake he
committed at the sunset of his intellectual life, the fact that the construct
itself is non-mystical is still untouched.

Burckhardt sees in this reduction of religion to psychological processes a
flagrant mistake—but he offers assumptions, not arguments, as a justification.
He complains that if the mind were only the consequence of a special
organization of matter, then it could not be termed to be *intelligent*—why I do
not know—. He states that *because* the mind is capable of perceiving the
essence of things, whatever that means, *then* there must be something essential
and immutable to it—And that such eternal faculties of the mind are what Jung
confuses with evolutionary endowments. 

I care not to dispute the author's claims on this regard. There are many more of
the kind of the ones above. I suppose this is sufficient record of my
disappointment. I do not think it happened to me before that two books by the
same author deserved so extraordinarily positive and so absolutely negative
opinions, respectively, except perhaps Julio Cortázar.


