---
title: A memory of my father 
categories: [ Personal ]
---


The night falls deep: I sense the moonlight with my heart. Once more, I cannot
sleep. What troubles me are these pearls, these little devils: *memories*.
Though taking many forms, like ill-intended water, a face, a name, a man always
appears. His eyes are a thousand eyes, his face is a thousand faces, his soul
is a thousand souls. Love and storm-born passions, tranquility and vengeance,
obscurity and kindness, weariness and hope: these are his avatars. 

One memory, in particular, comes to me, conjured through the mystic fingers of
the night. L and I are swimming in a hostile summer day. At sunset, tired and
sublimely happy, we head back to my house. As it was usual in the hellish
summers of Corrientes, there is a blackout and we have no electricity. A familiar dilemma is
faced: Open the windows and allow the nightly breeze to flow, but with it the
innumerable mosquitoes; keep the windows closed, the plague at bay, and bare
the heat. And then, when the final rays of light are finally perishing, as if
from another world, my father's voice appears, calling us in from the upper
floor. We blindly go up the stairs, passing by the painting of virgin Mary (in
Andean Baroque style), barely making our way to the frail candlelight that is
burning in the distance. 

We find my father in the little terrace. Directly over the floor, three
mattresses are lined up next to one another, with little space between them.
Above them, because we are far from the city and there are no lights during the
blackout, a myriad of stars of every color blaze. The breeze is strong enough
to keep the mosquitoes away. As we all lie there, in the terrace, without
blankets or pillows, my father begins to speak: *Those are the* Tres Marías,
*that is* Orión... And so we fall asleep.
