---
title: 2-Color belongs to P
categories: [ Science ]
---

Students sometimes struggle with proving that a given problem belongs to class
P. Though generally capable of providing an algorithm $\mathcal{A}$ that at least
approximates correction, great difficulty is encountered in $a.$ proving its correctness 
and $b.$ proving its belonging to P.

Acquaintance with examples may serve him at least as much as a theoretical
familiarity with the problem at hand. Thus, I present here a simple and
straight-forward algorithm that decides whether a graph $G = (V, E)$ has
$\chi(G) \leq 2$. An advanced student will probably be familiar with the
effective procedure instantiated by this algorithm. Thus, this entry is
directed to students just becoming acquainted with computational complexity.

--- 

Our task is to provide an algorithm that decides if any given graph can be
properly colored with two colors. Let us first describe the algorithm from a 
theoretical perspective. At the end, I shall provide a C implementation that 
relies on my [cGraphs API](https://github.com/slopezpereyra/cgraphs).

Our algorithm will take an arbitrary non-colored vertex as the root of its
connected component and color it with $1$. Within each connected component, it
runs BFS from the given root to explore it. Each time BFS
pivots over a vertex $p \in V$ and enqueues its neighbors, the algorithm also
colors each neighbor with $3 - c(p)$, thus ensuring that all colors are in the
range $\left\{ 1, 2 \right\} $.

Importantly, the color of any given vertex will be fully determined by the
parity of its level in the BFS tree. Since the root at level zero is set to
$1$, all vertices in the second level are colored with $2$, those in the third
with $1$, and so on.

\begin{align*}
    &j := 1\\
    &\textbf{while } j < n \textbf{ do } \\
    &\qquad r = \text{arbitrary non-colored vertex} \\ 
    &\qquad c(r) = 1 \\ 
    &\qquad queue = \left\{ r \right\} \\ 
    & \qquad\textbf{while } queue \neq \emptyset \textbf{ do } \\ 
    & \qquad \qquad p = pop(queue) \\ 
    &\qquad\qquad \textbf{for } x \in \Gamma(p) \textbf{ do } \\ 
    & \qquad \qquad \qquad \textbf{if } x \text{ not colored} \textbf{ do} \\ 
    &\qquad \qquad \qquad \qquad c(x) = 3 - c(p)\\ 
    &\qquad \qquad \qquad \qquad push(queue, x)\\
    &\qquad\qquad\qquad\textbf{fi}\\
    &\qquad\qquad \textbf{od}\\ 
    &\qquad\textbf{od}\\
    &\textbf{od}\\
    &\textbf{for } \left\{ x y \right\}  \in E \textbf{ do } \\ 
    &\qquad \textbf{if } c(x) = c(y) ~  \textbf{do } return \textbf{ False fi} \\ 
    &\textbf{od}\\
    &return \textbf{ True}
\end{align*}

The inner while runs BFS with a slight modification to color vertices when they
are enqueued and is thus $O(m)$. It is executed per each connected component
and the number of connected components is $O(n)$. $\therefore $ The algorithm 
is polynomial. 

That the algorithm correctly decides that a graph is two-colorable is trivial.
To prove that it also correctly decides that a graph is not two-colorable, we
shall prove a negative answer entails the graph contains an odd cycle.

Assume the algorithm was executed over $G = (V, E)$ and returned
$\textbf{False}$. Then there is some $\overrightarrow{xy} \in E$, in a
particular connected component $\mathcal{C} \subseteq G$, s.t.
$c(x) = c(y)$. Let us presume, without loss of generality, that 
$x$ was enqueued before $y$. Let us denote with $r$ the root 
of $\mathcal{C}$ from which BFS was ran.

Assume $x$ enqueues $y$. Then $c(y) = 3 - c(x) \neq c(x)$, a contradiction.
Then $x$ does not enqueue $y$. But this can only happen if, when $x$ is the at
front of the queue, $y$ was already enqueued by some other vertex. 

In particular, there is a vertex $w$ that is the vertex of greater level common
to $x$ and $y$ in the BFS tree---i.e. the vertex from which $x$ and $y$
diverge---. Let $\eta(w)$ be the level of $w$ in the BFS
tree.

Consider the cycle $w \ldots x y \ldots w$, which exists because all these
vertices belong to $\mathcal{C}$. There are $\eta(x) - \eta(w)$ edges from $w$ to
$x$, and $\eta(y) - \eta(w)$ edges from $y$ to $w$. There is one 
extra edge for $xy$. The total amount is then 

\begin{align*}
    \eta(x) - \eta(w) + \eta(y) - \eta(w) + 1 &= \eta(x) + \eta(y) - 2\eta(w) + 1
\end{align*}

By assumption, $\eta(x)$ and $\eta(y)$ are both greater than $\eta(w)$.
$\therefore $ $\eta(x) + \eta(y) > 2\eta(w)$ and length of the path is greater
than zero (sanity check). 

Since $c(x) = c(y)$, $\eta(x) \equiv \eta(y) \mod 2$ and therefore $\eta(x) +
\eta(y)$ is even. Then the length of the cycle is odd. 

$\therefore $ $C_{2k+1} \subseteq \mathcal{C}$ and $\chi(G) \geq 3$.

--- 

A C implementation of this algorithm may go as follows.

```c
bool twoColorable(Graph G){

    struct Queue* Q = createQueue();
    enQueue(Q, 0);
    setColor(1, 0, G);

    while (!isEmpty(Q)){
        u32 pivot = pop(Q);
        u32 pivotColor = getColor(pivot, G);
        u32 degree = Degree(pivot, G);
        for (u32 i = 0; i < degree; i++){
            u32 iNeighbor = Neighbor(i, pivot, G);
            if (getColor(iNeighbor, G) != 0){
                continue;
            }
            enQueue(Q, iNeighbor);
            setColor(3 - pivotColor, iNeighbor, G);
        }
    }

    printf("\n\n");
    
    for (u32 i = 0; i < 2*NumberOfEdges(G); i++){
        struct EdgeSt e = getEdge(i, G);
        color cX = getColor(e.x, G), cY = getColor(e.y, G);
        if (cX == cY){
            return false;
        }
    }

    return true;
}
```

One can make this more efficient by checking for improper colorings during the 
BFS run. However, proving the correctness of this slightly different algorithm 
is different.

```c
bool twoColorable(Graph G){

    struct Queue* Q = createQueue();
    enQueue(Q, 0);
    setColor(1, 0, G);

    while (!isEmpty(Q)){
        u32 pivot = pop(Q);
        u32 pivotColor = getColor(pivot, G);
        u32 degree = Degree(pivot, G);
        for (u32 i = 0; i < degree; i++){
            u32 iNeighbor = Neighbor(i, pivot, G);
            if (getColor(iNeighbor, G) == 0){
                enQueue(Q, iNeighbor);
                setColor(3 - pivotColor, iNeighbor, G);
            }
            if (getColor(iNeighbor, G) == pivotColor){
                return false;
            }
        }
    }
    return true;
}
```
