---
title: On guilt 
category: [ Personal ]
---

Of all negative sentiments, guilt is perhaps the only one to be actively
encouraged by customary education. Thousands of children everyday are
forced to beat their chests and whisper:

> Through my fault, through my fault,<br>
> through my most grievous fault.

César Vallejo, in *Los heraldos negros*, describes the man riddled by
tragedy as one who's eyes betray his entire life as *un charco de culpa*
(a puddle of guilt). Everybody knows of Judas' faith, who cried: *I have
sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood*, and hanged himself.
Dante, shortly after entering the fourth circle, asks horrified: *Why do
we let our guilt consume us so?* And everybody knows the story of
Oedipus, which psychoanalysis popularized, who realizing the man he had
killed was his father, and the woman he married his mother—who hanged
herself—blinds himself out of remorse.

Yet, though guilt is familiar to everyone, it is intriguing to see how
varied are its causes among people. I personally make an interest of the
matters a person feels guilty for, as they are often quite revealing of
their personality.

For instance, I once knew a man who carried a truly sinister weight,
having destroyed his family through acts of virulent hate. When I asked
what he felt guilty for, he gravely said a single thing still haunted
him to that day: That he wasn't all that nice to certain girlfriend of
his youth. In one of Guevara's diaries, he tells that a little dog which
accompanied his troops was about to get them killed: in a sudden burst
of barking, it was giving away their position. He and another soldier
had to silently asphyxiate the poor creature, which apparently caused
him such sorrow that he could never forget.

Bertrand Russell, in *The conquest of happiness*, makes a long and
well-argued case against guilt. He points out, indisputably to me, that
guilt induces no positive effect in the world. The victim of a
wrongdoing is in no way benefited if the author of it feels guilty, nor
the latter incurs in any reparation by drowning in remorse. We should
strive to amend the mistakes we can amend and forget those we cannot. It
is evident that a world where this ethics is practiced is happier and
more harmonious than its alternative.

If someone has ever hurt me, or treated me unjustly, I sincerely wish
that he and I forget about it. If the evil is too serious, for there are
things one cannot forget, what I seek is restoration—and no amount of
guilty feelings can have a restorative effect. Inversely, though one
should in general strive for kindness, it is inevitable that we shall be
unfair or wicked to some people. As long as our wrongdoings aren't so
great that even a compassionate soul may be incapable of forgetting
them, we can forget them ourselves if amendment isn't possible. If that
limit is crossed, I have nothing to advice, and perhaps there is nothing
to be said but to recall Plauto's words: *Nihil est miserius quam animus
hominis conscius.* \[Nothing is more miserable than the soul of a man
conscious of guilt.\]
