---
title: On guilt 
category: [ Personal ]
---

Of all negative sentiments, guilt is perhaps the only one to be actively
encouraged by customary education. Thousands of children everyday are forced to
beat their chests and whisper:

> Through my fault, through my fault,<br>
> through my most grievous fault.

César Vallejo, in *Los heraldos negros*, describes the man riddled by tragedy
as one who's eyes betray his entire life as *un charco de culpa* (a puddle of
guilt). Everybody knows of Judas' faith, who cried: *I have sinned in that I
have betrayed the innocent blood*, and hanged himself. Dante, shortly after
entering the fourth circle, asks horrified: *Why do we let our guilt consume us
so?* And everybody knows the story of Oedipus, who blinded himself out of
guilt.

It seems indisputable to me that guilt induces no positive effect in the world.
The victim of a wrongdoing is in no way benefited if the author of it feels
guilty, nor the latter incurs in any reparation by drowning in remorse. We
should strive to amend the mistakes we can amend and forget those we cannot.
This was perhaps what Borges meant when saying 

> *El olvido es la única venganza y el único perdón*

Assuming whatever harm we do can be repaired, or at least alleviated, without
need for guilt, it is evident that a guiltless world is preferable than its
alternative. The question then becomes to what extent guilt is the precursor of
reparation; in other words, to what extent forgiveness and reparation are sought
to alleviate the pain we have cause versus to alleviate the remorse we feel.
Guilt itself could, at least in principle, be justified by the effects it
brings about.

I do not convince myself, however, that guilt is necessary for a person to want
to make amends. In fact, in many cases it has a paralyzing effect, and it is
not uncommon to become stagnated by its weight, too ashamed to seek
forgiveness. Plauto wrote: *Nihil est miserius quam animus hominis conscius.*
\[Nothing is more miserable than the soul of a man conscious of guilt.\] The
world *miserable* could be changed by *impotent* while preserving the truth
value of the sentence.

One might believe that, insofar as guilt is inevitable, it makes no sense to
point out its pointlessness. This is only partially true. It is perhaps
impossible (and inhumane) to rid ourselves from all guilt. However, we can
certainly learn to handle it more properly, both individually and culturally,
and it is my believe that the first step in that direction is to acknowledge it
for what it is, instead of sanctifying it and confuse it for a sign of virtue.



