---
title: Milei's electoral success sprouts from the Peronist failures
categories: [Pol√≠tica]
---

Argentina's economy is in dire straits. [Unemployment has grown to pandemic
levels](https://buenosairesherald.com/economics/unemployment-in-argentina-rises-to-7-9-the-highest-in-four-years)
according to official reports (see also
[this](https://www.batimes.com.ar/news/economy/economic-pick-up-fails-to-filter-through-to-argentinas-job-market.phtml#:~:text=Argentina%27s%20manufacturing%20industry%20also%20showed%20a%20significant%20decline%20%E2%80%93%204%2C162%20less%20jobs%20in%20March%20while%20there%20were%202%2C088%20less%20workers%20in%20agriculture%2C%20livestock%2C%20hunting%20and%20forestry%20and%201%2C185%20less%20in%20education.)),
and one every four people are over-employed. [Homelessness keeps
rising](https://www.reuters.com/world/americas/winter-deepens-misery-argentinas-poor-following-mileis-financial-cuts-2024-06-05/),
and at least [according to an
NGO](https://www.batimes.com.ar/news/argentina/quarter-of-rough-sleepers-in-buenos-aires-city-have-been-on-streets-for-less-than-year.phtml)
25% of homeless people became homeless in the last year. A [constant decline in
industrial
activity](https://www.plenglish.com/news/2025/08/18/argentine-industry-accumulates-four-months-of-decline/)
has taken it to levels similar to those of 2007, with [factories
closing](https://www.wsj.com/world/americas/argentina-is-losing-faith-in-mileis-free-market-revolution-9475ba42?gaa_at=eafs&gaa_n=ASWzDAiVd23n-aagDkO0_iZplWiCwK1tJds1QJDYm5btjrQUty5CRgQBxRwWDMx812I%3D&gaa_ts=68e04c0b&gaa_sig=LQ4yzqi4vT1PrrgyA6_fHONGxzSrvUX8UHyVVZ5tnqD8Z3K0yzIBZpmWeDdSlIPolnATI1blqqRcOV-wM1QBlA%3D%3D)
every day. 

But even so, Milei keeps accumulating electoral successes. His presidential
campaign went very well and now he has won the legislative elections in
astonishing fashion. I can think of only two factors two explain this: the
failure of Peronism, and the lowering of inflation. 

In a way, the lowering of inflation carries more of a psychological than an
economical weight. Though certainly a positive of Milei's government, it is
little more than a consequence of the contraction of economic activity I
mentioned at the beginning. The lowering of inflation does not necessarily
indicate an improvement in the overall economy but is rather a consequence of
its infirmity. 

That said, we must put ourselves in the shoes of the poor individuals in our
country, which comprise the great majority, and understand the desperation which
the spiking inflation generated in previous governments. People that
underestimate this are usually relatively secured against inflation through some
mechanism, e.g. members of the judicial system who can virtually decide on their
own salary raises. Inflation, specially hyper or close to hyperinflation, can
drive a people to irrational despair. So even though life conditions have not
improved for anyone, and even though Milei's government has stabilized the
currency by means of shattering the economy, the lowering of inflation is still
felt by most people as a major relief.

With regards to the failures of the last Peronist administrations, and the hate
and anger which Peronism brews, there is little to add to what's already
commonplace. Yet Peronism is such a resilient movement that it will likely, and
perhaps for the worse, come back stronger if time is given.

---

As a side note, I must admit that I do not understand Peronism. I just can't
wrap my head around it, and I doubt anyone can. It is undeniably a
pseudo-ideology, a phenomenon which can only be described from the lenses of
anthropology or sociology, but not political theory. 

Originally, it was a right-wing, proto-fascist movement, with an established
track record of human right violations, censorship and oppression. Yet the
mixture of this violence with a welfare state, a blatant yet appealing populism,
and certain undeniable achievements (such as universal healthcare and labor
rights), made an indelible impression in the nation. From then on Peronism
evolved with several, mutually contradicting expressions: a communist *and*
catholic guerrilla (?) in Montoneros, the fascist paramilitary group AAA (which
counted with Peron's approval), and the Kirchner's moderate progressivism, all
claimed to themselves the name of *peronist*. It is the incoherence which
underlies this chaos what I mean to express when calling it pseudo-ideological.
Less pedantically, I mean to say that Peronism is about *power*, not about
ideology: its alignment derives vertically from leading figures, and policy
making is carried out in *ad hoc* fashion.

Some peronist governments had undeniable achievements and merits, but in general
I do not think Peronism is a force of good in Argentina. It has however
successfully branded in the worker man's mind the idea that any betterment of
his conditions is impossible without it. This is particularly tragic if we
consider that Peronism is not a worker's movement. If the movement lacks any
philosophical substance, then it particularly lacks the libertarian principle
according to which the workers themselves should have the right of controlling
their own activity, rather than depending on the beneficence of a superior yet
generous leader. This was of course resisted at first, but 
[all resistant was suppressed](https://www.criticapenal.com.ar/wp-content/uploads/numero3/cesano.pdf).

--- 

Whatever the case, and going back to our topic, the last Peronist government was
such a profound disappointment to every day people, [who saw their economy
shattered](https://www.batimes.com.ar/news/economy/argentinas-inflation-hit-211-in-2023-fastest-gain-in-three-decades.phtml),
that the emergence of a pseudo-messianic element such as Milei's so-called
libertarianism was tremendously appealing. It is this, and not an economic
success, what explains Milei's electoral achievements. He is still in time to
claim that current issues are aftertastes of Peronism, a claim which is not
entirely true. Though disastrous in monetary terms, the last Peronist
administration did have some successes. It managed to [rebound industry
significantly](https://www.focus-economics.com/countries/argentina/#:~:text=17.5-,1.9)
after the COVID pandemic and economic activity within the sector showed a [real,
albeit non-uniform
increase](https://www.uia.org.ar/centro-de-estudios/4030/ceu-informe-industrial-no03-2023/).
Now, after libertarian deterioration, historical companies such as [Celulosa
Argentina](https://www.pulpapernews.com/20250903/16968/celulosa-argentina-files-bankruptcy-after-devastating-balance-sheet)
went bankrupt, [education funding is
squalid](https://www.batimes.com.ar/news/argentina/milei-vetoes-state-university-funding-bill-escalating-conflict-with-education-sector.phtml),
the health system is [in dire
straits](https://www.ap.org/news-highlights/spotlights/2025/argentines-reel-from-health-care-cutbacks-as-president-mileis-state-overhaul-mirrors-trumps/),
and science and research [were
destroyed](https://www.batimes.com.ar/news/argentina/mileis-chainsaw-slashes-funds-for-argentinas-science-and-research-institutes.phtml).

With regards to public spending on health, science and education, we are all
familiar with the following simplification: "the left" wants a big state with
huge spending, sometimes beyond its budget; "the right" wants a small state that
takes care only of the most essential. As most simplifications, this is false.
The common argument that science, education, and health are in dire straits
because the state *should not* or *cannot* support them financially is false, as
well as the claim that Milei's government aims at a small state. Milei has
drastically *increased* expenditure in [surveillance and
intelligence](https://www.batimes.com.ar/news/economy/milei-boosts-budget-of-argentinas-intelligence-services-by-73-billion-pesos.phtml)
and [plans to do the
same](https://www.economist.com/the-americas/2024/08/22/javier-milei-is-splurging-on-the-army)
with the military. (See [this
entry](https://slopezpereyra.github.io/2024-12-10-2024Represion/) for a more
specific report.) Both Peronism and Milei's movement aim at a big and very
present state. They simply disagree on where its spending should go and what
aims its presence should seek to achieve. 

In any case, now that Milei has won the legislative elections, the worse is yet
to come. Argentina's economy will most likely continue to plunge and we will all
continue to see our neighbours, friends and lovers struggling to make ends meet.
Now I recall a year ago finding my neighbour, a pensioner, begging for food on
the street. I do not live in a poor neighbourhood. He had a fine apartment in a
fine place of the city. But [Milei's cuts to
pensions](https://www.dw.com/en/argentinas-austerity-cuts-drive-pensioners-onto-the-streets/g-74254531)
forced him to beg for bread. I think of him often, because he isn't a statistic:
I would often cross him in the street and say good morning. And I boil in
vengeful anger when I recall his hunger.






