---
title: On the affinity we feel with certain writers
categories: [Personal]
---

At times I read to find beauty, at times to find knowledge, but more often than
not I read to combat solitude. For better or for worse, I need to feel
*affinity*, a feeling so rare and exquisite that I would surely place it among
the most ecstatic of them all. I often feel adrift, alone... What are these
writings, after all, if not a game of playing with an abstract interlocutor? 

In no way do I fool myself into believing that this sensation sprouts from some
form of superiority. Most people possess a perfect form of beauty, a secret
delight, sometimes in the form of an uncut gem, sometimes in that of a diamond
refined. But it is not sufficient to find beauty in others so as to feel
affinity, even of the superficial kind, in the same way that it's not sufficient
for us to recognize the merits of a work of art for it to actually move us.

No, affinity (or a lack thereof) is not about intelligence, profoundness, wit or
knowledge—it's not about sharing some common interests or a sense of humour.
It's about a coincidence of fundamental values and conceptions of the elemental
issues of life—freedom, death, love, friendship... And in this regard I do
reckon that, though neither superior nor inferior to anybody else, I am somewhat
unconventional.


So yes, at times I read aesthetically, at times intellectually, but more often
than not I read heart-hungrily, in need of remembering that others saw certain
matters in fashion akin to mine. This, among other things, is what I find so
attractive about the anarchist tradition. Putting political theory aside, in
figures such as Émile Armand, Maria Lacerda de Moura, Kropotkin, Osvaldo Bayer,
Élisée Reclus, I found not intellectual giants, but above all *friends*.
Quevedo's words are true: when reading, we listen with our eyes the words of the
dead and we converse with long gone spirits...

My friends are not only anarchists. I felt this comforting form of spiritual
affinity with Montaigne, with Antonio Machado, with Robert Frost. I long to find
more living souls with which to feel it too. So far, at twenty-seven years of
age, only a few have come my way...
















