---
title: A night of hallucinations 
categories: [Personal]
---

Last night I suffered the worst sequence of sleep paralysis episodes in my life.
As I noted in some other of my personal entries, I have suffered from sleep
paralysis intermittently ever since my adolescence. The first attack occurred
when I was fifteen years old, in Valladolid, Spain. The malady came to stay.

In my case, sleep paralysis most frequently comes when, awakened during a
regular night of sleep, I try to fall asleep again. The so-called *evil presence
hallucination* is the most frequent one, which manifests itself very vaguely in
most cases, though not lacking from time to time an image as concrete as
terrifying. Auditory hallucinations are the most common ones; tactile
hallucinations, the rarest.

I have so much experience with this horrific phenomenon that I am capable of
staying calm and preserve my temper until I am released from its grip. However,
the episode often manifests itself in a never-ending loop: I have sleep
paralysis, I suffer, I awaken. Then I try to sleep again, I have paralysis, I
suffer, I awaken. And so on. This often continues until my will falters and I
desist from sleeping again. Perhaps for this reason, however calmly I endure the
suffering, the phenomenon causes a great physical and psychological fatigue.

Last night, for the first time in years, my defenses were absolutely broken. A
series of extremely bizarre episodes assaulted me, during most of which I was
unable to keep my cool. The worst one, by far, went more or less like this. 

As I try to fall sleep, the episode ensues. There is a rapid, frantic clatter of
claws on the floor—like a swarm of dogs prowling close by. Every sinew of my
being is oppressed by the unbearable feeling of being observed by something. My
mind speaks: «The devil came». The clattering becomes more loud but now it is
not the sound of claws but duller and more muffled sound, like steps taken by
the naked feet of many people walking franticly. Then the parade comes: Naked
men and women walk like dogs: quadruped, four-footed, insane. I cannot see their
faces. Absolute horror takes possession of me. It feels like an eternity but
eventually I wake up.

Now, an insensible reader might dismiss these images as fantasies. Yet, he must
recall that the individual hallucinating perceives his vision as truly, as
concretely, as undeniable as he is perceiving this screen, that sheet of paper,
the light and color of the table or sit he occupies, the subtle sensation of his
shirt pressed against his sin or the inexplicable whiteness of the moon. There
is nothing vague in a vision, at least not *during* the vision, and whatever
vagueness it has is distinguished only afterwards by the examination of the sane
mind—just like during a dream the rarest of things are totally natural, and only
the vigil's mind deems them fantastic—.





















