---
title: On the affinity we feel with certain writers
categories: [Personal]
---

At times I read to find beauty, at times to find knowledge, but more often than
not I read to combat solitude. For better or for worse, I need to feel
*affinity*. This saves from feeling adrift, alone, as I often do. What are these
writings, after all, if not a game of playing with an abstract interlocutor, if
not pretending to converse with a like-minded friend? To write is to talk alone,
and *quien habla solo espera hablar a Dios un día*.

In no way do I fool myself, like other people I know, into believing that this
sense of loneliness sprouts from some form of superiority. Most people possess a
perfect form of beauty, a secret delight, sometimes in the form of an uncut gem,
sometimes in that of a refined diamond. Not only that, but we are *all*, in a
sense, alone. Within the gifted or the mediocre artist, the sharp or the blunt
mind, the violent or the peaceful soul, original material is constantly
produced, inescapably secret to everyone else, at times to themselves too. We
all carry ineffable things: every heart knows too well what are the words he
never speaks, the words to which all ears are deaf. They are like scriptures
carved in the cavity of our chest, in a language only we know, and whose words
lack a translation that is quite exactly right, that doesn't leave something
behind.

No, affinity (or a lack thereof) is not about intelligence, profoundness, wit or
knowledge—it's not about sharing some common interests or a sense of humour.
It's about a coincidence of fundamental values, matching conceptions of the
elemental issues of life—freedom, death, love... And in this regard I do reckon
that, though neither superior nor inferior to anybody else, I am somewhat
unconventional, or at least guided by a strong urge not to be lured through
traditional paths.

So yes, at times I read aesthetically, at times intellectually, but more often
than not I read heart-hungrily, in need of remembering that others saw certain
matters in fashion akin to mine. This, among other things, is what I find so
attractive about the anarchist tradition. In
figures such as Émile Armand, Maria Lacerda de Moura, Kropotkin or Élisée
Reclus, I found not only intellectual stimulation, but above all *friends*.
Quevedo's words are true: when reading, we listen with our eyes the words of the
dead and we converse with long gone spirits...

My friends are not only anarchists. I felt this comforting form of spiritual
affinity with Montaigne, with Antonio Machado, with Robert Frost. I long to find
more living souls with which to feel it too. So far, at twenty-seven years of
age, only a few have come my way...
















