---
title: A short comment on W. James theory of truth
categories: [Philosophy, Personal]
---

In the second conference which comprises William James' *Pragmatism*, he
explains why this philosophy does not *in principle* entail a preference for
materialism over idealism, "no such materialism bias as ordinary empiricsm
labors under". He writes:

> If theological ideas prove to have a value for concrete life, they will be
> true, for pragmatism, in the sense of being good for so much. For how much
> more they are true, will depend entirely on their relations to other truths
> that also have to be acknowledged.

The Absolute of transcendental idealism *performs a concrete function*, insofar
as its believers draw practical consequences or guides to action from it. He
emphasizes these consequences are *good*, and insofar has they are *good*, he
writes, who could deny the truth of the Absolute?

Truth, James' says, is "a species of good", not a category distinct from it.
"True is the name of whatever proves itself to be good in the way of belief".
"What would be better for us to believe" is proposed as a candidate definition
for *truth*. Something is true if it "fits every part of life best and combines
with the collectivity of experience's demands (...)".

There is a special kind of relativism here, one which is not only different
from traditional epistemological relativism (truth does not truly exist
independently from a subject's perspective) but which in fact contradicts it
entirely. It is of course conceivable that an idea $\lambda$ may be consistent
and fruitful within the 'system' of person $A$ while being inconsistent or
unfruitful within the 'system' of person $B$. (By a person's 'system' I mean
here the factors which James' deems important in the formation of belief: the
pre-existing collection of ideas the individual has and the demands which
experience imposes upon them.) So far nothing problematic exists: in logics, for
instance, $(a)$ different sets of axioms or $(b)$ different models may associate
to a given formula $\varphi$ a different value, and the semantic of $\varphi$ is
undefined except with regards to any such set or model. However, the statement 
"$\varphi$ is true under model $X$ but false under model $Y$" is true
independently of all models, i.e. it is a meta-logical truth, and in fact the
whole first order theory of types would make little sense if one could not make
such a claim. 

Does James' notion of truth allow for, so to speak, meta-subjective evaluations
of truth? If we assume his theory is correct, could we determine the truth value
of a sentence such as "$B$ is wrong in believing $\lambda$"? If James is right, such
question could only be resolved through reference to $B$'s believes, actions and
experiences, and the sentence *does not imply* "$A$ is wrong in believing
$\lambda$". This seems to entail the phrases "$\lambda$ is false" and $\lambda$
is true" lack any meaning, insofar as they lack reference to a subject. This
issue is only solved when $\lambda$ is an idea which cannot, under any
circumstance, be fruitful, productive or coherent. Such ideas are not many, but
they do exist. We may take as an example epistemological relativism, only
because this example emphasizes that interpreting James's theory as a form of
that doctrine is wrong.

The fundamental issue with epistemological relativism, as well as with
scepticism, is that it is strictly academic. The pragmatist claim is simple:
everybody acts as if some things were certainly true and some things were
certainly false. The most radical relativist has rather strict notions of true
and false, as well as of right and wrong, when he takes his car to the mechanic
or goes to the hospital to mend a wound or treat an illness. Furthermore, the
relativist or the sceptic do not fail to act as if their believes were true due
to hypocrisy or lack of consequence: they fail to act in accordance to their
philosophies because doing so is contrary to life itself. If any given species,
at some point in natural history, was not hard-wired to act as if certain things
were *facts*; if a predetermined universe of truths was not embedded in their
brains, along with the capacity to expand this aprioristic universe through
experience, Darwinian evolution has surely erased every trace of it. For what
kind of existence can endure without action? And what is belief but rule for
action?

But I digress. We must accept *at least* that we act as if things were true, and
thus land again on questions arising from James' theory. Any theory of truth
which does not lead from "$A$ is right in believing $\lambda$" to "$B$ is wrong
in not believing $\lambda$" is problematic. The fact that a subset of all ideas
escapes this problem does not reduce it. Could one say Galileo and Bruno were
wrong in their beliefs? Such beliefs were $(a)$ certainly inconsistent with
facts as recognized in their times[^1] and $(b)$ pernicious to their lives. Are the
flames which extinguished Bruno's life a refutation of his theses? 

Many examples such as these ones come to mind. James' theory of truth is
unsatisfactory. Formal logics can allow itself to provide (boolean) semantics
only via reference to a first order model. For instance, it is perfectly natural
that a sentence $\varphi$ may hold within Euclid's axioms and not hold in a
non-Euclidean system. In the world of *facts*, however, which is messier than
the abstract world of mathematics, necessary reference to both a subject and a
(though rather undefined) notion of utility makes reasonable debate almost
impossible.



--- 

[^1] Feyerabend's *Against method* provides a rich and interesting description
of how inconsistent the ideas of the scientific revolution truly were, and the
manner in which some of these inconsistencies persevered through the centuries.












