---
title: In praise of gregariousness
categories: [ Personal ]
---

What makes a man dangerous is not the strength of his arms, but the content of
his heart. The weakest men, resented or enraged, poses more reason to worry
than any gentle giant. Similarly, what makes beautiful a person is not the
power, but the purity of their thoughts. 

Gregariousness is a precious virtue. The world, with all its sorrows, is filled
with kind and beautiful people, some as simple and immediate as a flower, some
as complex and mysterious as an abyss or the moon. With the exception of
serious flaws—for violence and wickedness are real—one need only practice a
radical acceptance of the other for their virtues to become almost instantly
apparent, and to learn how very much alike we all are. (If one is not willing
nor capable of practicing such acceptance, one has very little right to any
claim of justice, for the world is constantly accepting our many flaws.)

A few days ago I spent a sweet afternoon with a girl whose life was very
different than mine. She was the product of an adolescent pregnancy, and her
father ended up in prison. Though born in the interior of province that is
culturally close to mine, she left to to the austral barrens of Usuahia at an
early age. We shared, it's true, a passion for music, and tranquility delighted
us both in a way uncommon to people of our age. But an ignorant opinion would 
have guessed so different lives should have produced different people.

However, despite how different our lives were, the contents of our hearts were
very much in tune. The struggles and joys which decorated the landscapes of our
minds were painted in similar tones, drawn from the same palette. In our
conversation, which perhaps was just a whisper, I saw sparks of human kindness.
I learned that we were ongoing rather similar psychological processes; that, in
all our differences, the sufferings which plagued our families (and our minds)
were not as different as first glances gave away; that it wasn't an interest
nor a passion what was bringing us together, but something else indescribable
and true. And in her kiss I felt I was unsullied, freed from the hindrances
which always set me apart from others.

I see it now: Aloofness is not a crown. If there is any such thing as wisdom in
this world, it must be this: that, at least *in potentia*, a perfect form of
kindness resides in every living thing. If one assumes this is true (and I
believe one must, even if only to find a reason a live), a simple imperative
arises: that one ought to strive to find it and, if possible, to nurture it in
oneself and others. It is not a revolution, but a world under such ethic is
superior to its alternative.



