---
title: Two magical dreams
categories: [ Personal ]
---

Two magical dreams came to me last night. The first was dreadful and dark, the
second was sylvan and vernal. Of the first, I am afraid, my recollection is
quite poor. $S$ was with me and I had to fight a terribly dark, ghost-like
entity that lived in a tumbledown structure of cobblestone, with many levels and
rooms, most of them roofless and unprotected from the winds. It was a cloudless
night and a treacherous moon was biting its infinite jugular and swallowing
every star. $S$ would always be behind me. I would fly and so would the entity.
I grieved it with a beam of light that came out of my hand (or was it a wand?)
and confidence grew within me, but as we glided under the night it hit me with a
spell that caused a tremendous affliction both in my body and my soul. I became
frightened and wanted to escape. I felt shame that $S$ would see me wavering and
flinching so.

In the second dream I was wandering deep in virgin woods, walking through a
watery ravine of pristine beauty, surrounded only by immense and ancient trees
and buzzing beehives and emerald pebbles. There was not a single bleakening
glade and it seemed the night should never fall in such a place, for all that
lived lived for and with and by virtue of the light. I found, however, something
bemusing and sad: the corpses of what I then termed "druids". They were not
human-like beings but jellyfish-looking, flying green creatures that moved
through the air by virtue of their white tentacles and whose orange and yellow
umbrellas would swell to a great size to later slowly deflate as breathing sacks
of life in an unceasing cycle of inspiration and expiration. These bewildering
creatures grew on the trees, hanging from their tentacles with their umbrellas to
the floor, leaving the branches to begin their vagrant lives as soon as maturity
was reached. In any case, as I walked through the forest I found their corpses,
not packed together in a single area, but here and there alone and dismembered
from the tribe —if they had tribes at all… I found corpses of another type of
druid as well, of similar anatomy but lacking the yellow and white tones of the
first, rather green and brown instead, as if the firsts were druids of the sun
and the last were of the woods. I remember collecting their bodies, carrying
them upon my shoulder, thinking I should take them to my neuroscience professor
so that we could bring them back to life through some magical power I was sure
he knew or had access to. At one point I found a tumbledown shack in the middle
of the woods. My sandals were there and only then I came to realize I had been
carrying all these corpses through the unending woods barefooted. The shack door
was affected by sun-light, but only a few steps ahead inside the shack there was
but darkness. I saw nothing of what was inside. I wanted to enter into the
darkness, but I knew it was dangerous and I still had to carry the corpses to my
professor, for their sake and the sake of their now lost lives. I put on my
sandals and went away, leaving the shack behind me, unentered and undesecrated
and undefiled.


