\documentclass[a4paper, 12pt]{article}

\usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
\usepackage{textcomp}
\usepackage{amssymb}
\usepackage{newtxtext} \usepackage{newtxmath}
\usepackage{amsmath, amssymb}
\newtheorem{problem}{Problem}
\newtheorem{example}{Example}
\newtheorem{lemma}{Lemma}
\newtheorem{theorem}{Theorem}
\newtheorem{problem}{Problem}
\newtheorem{example}{Example} \newtheorem{definition}{Definition}
\newtheorem{lemma}{Lemma}
\newtheorem{theorem}{Theorem}


\begin{document}

Every person I know is a reminder of you. Whatever is noble in their heart
reminds me of yours through similarity---whatever is evil, through opposition.

I often ask myself: Is this it, then? Is humanity condemned, in my eyes, to the
unbearable weight of you? There is nothing in anyone that could stand the
weight of you. You have every virtue I cherish---even every flaw I cherish---
and everyone and everything is small beside you. You have changed what I expect
of life. You have become a talisman that drives my gaze into the stars, so that I
never forget that life's worth living.

I could never begin to tell you what you mean to me. You are my love, my one
and only love, forever. This cannot be changed, cannot mutate, cannot become
impermanent. The years have shown that our bond possesses the virtues of the
water: its surface suffers constant transmutation, its depths remain the same.

I have often wished to be like water, to become water for you. I have wished to
dispossess myself of the regions of my personality that do not contribute to
your happiness. But time and time again, I have failed you. I wish that I could
promise you that, someday, you'll have the life you've dreamed with me. But one
must not make such promises. I can only promise this: I will always see your
true face. That spiritual visage will be the one truth I'll hold on to in this
life. 

Smile and be happy, if not for you for me. We have been given the blessing of
knowing each other. Life, in all probability, is a dark and loveless affair. We
are among the very few which destiny has spared. You'll always have a friend in
me. So smile: I'm smiling too.

~ 

---Santi











\end{document}



